Tutorial for Sample memcached (#10)
operator-framework/java-operator-plugins: docs/tutorial.md

---
title: Quarkus Operator Tutorial
linkTitle: Tutorial
weight: 30
description: An in-depth walkthough of building and running a Quarkus-based operator.
---

## Prerequisites

- Java through the [installation guide](https://java.com/en/download/help/download_options.html).
- User authorized with `cluster-admin` permissions.
- Maven installation [installation guide](https://maven.apache.org/install.html)

## Overview

We will create a sample project to let you know how it works and this sample will:

- Create a Memcached Deployment if it doesn't exist
- Ensure that the Deployment size is the same as specified by the Memcached CR spec
- Update the Memcached CR status using the status writer with the names of the CR's pods

## Create a new project

> Use the CLI to create a new memcached-operator project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the CLI to create a new memcached-quarkus-operator project:
```

Author: Modified.

```sh
mkdir memcached-quarkus-operator
cd memcached-quarkus-operator
# we'll use a domain of example.com
# so all API groups will be <group>.example.com
operator-sdk init --plugins quarkus --domain example.com --project-name memcached-quarkus-operator
```

#### A note on dependency management

`operator-sdk init` generates `pom.xml` file. This file contains all the dependencies required to run the operator.

### MemcachedQuarkusOperator

> The main program of the operator `JavaOpOperator.java` initializes and runs the operator. The operator uses java-operator-sdk which is similar to the Go lang version of controller-runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main program of the operator `MemcachedQuarkusOperator.java` initializes and runs the operator. The operator uses java-operator-sdk which is similar to the Go lang version of controller-runtime.
```

Author: Modified.

The code below will initialize and define the informers/watches for your operator.

```
  @Override
  public int run(String... args) throws Exception {
    operator.start();

    Quarkus.waitForExit();
    return 0;
  }
```

## Create a new API and Controller

> Create a new Custom Resource Definition (CRD) API with group `cache` version `v1alpha1` and Kind `Memcached`. The plugin, still in its alpha state, will output debug messages which are normal.

Reviewer: This should match the items you are passing in to the command below.

```suggestion
Create a new Custom Resource Definition (CRD) API with group `cache` version `v1` and Kind `Memcached`. The plugin, still in its alpha state, will output debug messages which are normal.
```

Author: Modified.

```console
$ operator-sdk create api --plugins quarkus --group cache --version v1 --kind Memcached
InjectResource called
UpdateResource called
Scaffold called
NewCreateAPIScaffolder called
InjectFS called
api.Scaffold()
PostScaffold called
...
```

> This will scaffold the `MemcachedController`, `MemcachedSpec`, `MemcachedStatus` and `Memcached`.

Author: Added tree structure.

#### Understanding Kubernetes APIs

> For an in-depth explanation of Kubernetes APIs and the group-version-kind model, check out these [kubebuilder docs][kb-doc-gkvs].

Reviewer 2: do we know the URL for this kb doc?

Author: Yes, modified.

The `java-operator-plugins` project uses the APIs from [java-operator-sdk](https://github.com/java-operator-sdk/java-operator-sdk). The java-operator-sdk library is to Java what `controller-runtime` is to Go. It provides a framework to help Java projects interact with the Kubernetes API.

### Define the API

`create api` command will scaffold out an `MemcachedController`, `MemcachedSpec`, `MemcachedStatus` and `Memcached`. 

> 

Author: Modified.

#### `MemcachedSpec`

> Initially, the scaffolded Spec file will be empty. The operator developer needs to add attributes to this file according to his need. For the Memcached example, we added the size field as shown below example.

Author: Cool. thank you!

```
// MemcachedSpec defines the desired state of Memcached
public class MemcachedSpec {

    // Add Spec information here

> 	// Size is the size of the memcached deployment

Author: Modified.

    private Integer size;

    public Integer getSize() {
        return size;
    }

    public void setSize(Integer size) {
        this.size = size;
    }
}
```

#### `MemcachedStatus`

Similar to the Spec file `MemcachedStatus` file got scaffolded as part of the `create api` command. The user has to modify a Status file. For the Memcached example, we too list of nodes as shown below.
The nodes field is a list of string values and it contains the name of the Memcached pods.

```
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

// MemcachedStatus defines the observed state of Memcached
public class MemcachedStatus {

    // Add Status information here

> 	// Nodes are the names of the memcached pods

Author: Modified.

    private List<String> nodes;

    public List<String> getNodes() {
        if (nodes == null) {
            nodes = new ArrayList<>();
        }
        return nodes;
    }

    public void setNodes(List<String> nodes) {
        this.nodes = nodes;
    }
}
```

**Note** The Node field is just to illustrate an example of a Status field. In real cases, it would be recommended to use [Conditions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties).

#### `Memcached`

`Memcached` file scaffolded via `create api` command. It extends the properties of `MemcachedSpec` and `MemcachedStatus`.

```
// Memcached is the Schema for the memcacheds API

@Version("v1alpha1")
@Group("cache.example.com")
public class Memcached extends CustomResource<MemcachedSpec, MemcachedStatus>
    implements Namespaced {}
```

### Apply CR and CRD's using below command

> #### CRD - Custom Resource

Reviewer 2: I found "CR" in `<h3>` and "Custom Resource" in `<h4>` a bit confusing.
I know we had this "CRD.yaml defines a CR" and "CRD is an endpoint" convo separately.

But I wonder if it'll be simpler if we just exclude "CR/Custom Resource" altogether from the `<h3>` and `<h4>` headers simply as: "Apply CRD using below command" and "CRD - Custom Resource Definition"?

What do you guys think? @laxmikantbpandhare @jmrodri ?

Author: Agree with you @tlwu2013. I will mentioned CR as Custom Resource and Custom Resource Definition as CRD. It will be uniform throughout the document.

Create a file with the name `crd.yaml`. CRD enables users to add their own/custom objects to the Kubernetes cluster.

This file will contain the below content. 

```
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  annotations:
    controller-gen.kubebuilder.io/version: v0.4.1
  name: memcacheds.cache.example.com
spec:
  group: cache.example.com
  names:
    kind: Memcached
    listKind: MemcachedList
    plural: memcacheds
    singular: memcached
  scope: Namespaced
  versions:

>   - name: v1alpha1

Author: I modified it to v1 so that it will consistent in the entire document.

    schema:
      openAPIV3Schema:
        ...
    served: true
    storage: true
    subresources:
      status: {}
status:
  acceptedNames:
    kind: ""
    plural: ""
  conditions: []
  storedVersions: []
```

Create the CRD:

> `kubectl apply -f cr.yaml`

Reviewer 2: typo: `crd.yaml`

Author: Modified.

> `kubectl apply -f cr.yaml`

Author: Yes, modified.

### Create Memcached Custom Resource - memcached-sample.yaml

> Update the sample Memcached CR manifest at k8s/samples/memcached-sample.yaml and define the spec as the following

Author: Yes, modified it to Create.

This file will contain the below content. 

```
apiVersion: cache.example.com/v1alpha1
kind: Memcached
metadata:
  name: memcached-sample
spec:
  # Add fields here
  size: 1
```

Create the CR:

`kubectl apply -f memcached-sample.yaml`

> ## Implement the Controller

Reviewer: This section is better but I don't know what file I'm supposed to be editing. And I don't know if I'm supposed to be adding the examples you've posted in this section. See more comments below.

Author: Modified the Controller section by adding above information.

> **Note**: The next two subsections explain how the two methods `createOrUpdateResource` and `deleteResource`. These two methods will be called whenever there is some update/create/delete event occurs in the cluster. 

Reviewer 2: _nit:_  incompleted sentence:
>The next two subsections explain how the two methods `createOrUpdateResource` and `deleteResource`.

Author: Modified.

These methods are already scaffolded as part of the `create api` command.

### createOrUpdateResource

This method initially checks for the deployment by using the below code.

```
        Deployment deployment =
                client
                        .apps()
                        .deployments()
                        .inNamespace(resource.getMetadata().getNamespace())
                        .withName(resource.getMetadata().getName())
                        .get();

> ```

Reviewer: This is an example of you telling me the reader what the code does but you didn't tell me where I should add this and why I even care to do this. Basically the way I would approach the "implement the controller" section is as follows:

* Summarize what you plan on having the user do
* Show them how to do

For example, you would tell the user that we plan to implement the controller. In this memcached example, we will need to watch the deployment so we can react to size changes. We will accomplish this in the steps below.

Then proceed to tell them what to add. 

First, let's get the `Deployment`. In the MemachedController.java, find the `createOrUpdateResource` method and add the following code below the ` // TODO: fill in logic` comment. It should look like:

```
    @Override
    public UpdateControl<Memcached> createOrUpdateResource(
        Memcached resource, Context<Memcached> context) {
        // TODO: fill in logic
        Deployment deployment =
                client
                        .apps()
                        .deployments()
                        .inNamespace(resource.getMetadata().getNamespace())
                        .withName(resource.getMetadata().getName())
                        .get();

        return UpdateControl.noUpdate();
    }  
```

For each step you outlined below do the same thing.

At the very end of this section you should have the fully populated `createOrUpdateResource` method shown at the end so that the user can refer to it in case they made any mistakes along the way.

Author: Added all of the above suggestions in the Controller Logic.

            return UpdateControl.noUpdate();
        }
```

Then, get the list of pods and pod names with the below code.

```
        List<Pod> pods =
                client
                        .pods()
                        .inNamespace(resource.getMetadata().getNamespace())
                        .withLabels(labelsForMemcached(resource))
                        .list()
                        .getItems();

        List<String> podNames =
                pods.stream().map(p -> p.getMetadata().getName()).collect(Collectors.toList());
```

Now, check whether resources get created or not. Then, it verifies podnames with the Memcached resources. If there is a mismatch in either of these conditions then we need to do a reconciliation.

```
        if (resource.getStatus() == null
                || !CollectionUtils.isEqualCollection(podNames, resource.getStatus().getNodes())) {
            if (resource.getStatus() == null) resource.setStatus(new MemcachedStatus());
            resource.getStatus().setNodes(podNames);
            return UpdateControl.updateStatusSubResource(resource);
        }
```

### createMemcachedDeployment

> Thie method simply creates the Deployment as specified below.

Reviewer: What is this and where does it belong? Is this something I have to create?

Author: Modified it in the intro.

                                new PodSpecBuilder()
                                    .withContainers(
                                        new ContainerBuilder()
                                            .withImage("memcached:1.4.36-alpine")
                                            .withName("memcached")
                                            .withCommand("memcached", "-m=64", "-o", "modern", "-v")
                                            .withPorts(
                                                new ContainerPortBuilder()
                                                    .withContainerPort(11211)
                                                    .withName("memcached")
                                                    .build())
                                            .build())
                                    .build())
                            .build())
                    .build())
            .build();
    }
```

### deleteResource

The `deleteResource` method is an implemented method. The deletion part will be taken care of by the Java Operator SDK  library, that's why it is empty.

## Run the Operator Locally

> ### 1. Run locally outside the cluster

Reviewer: Why number it? there are no other steps below. 
```suggestion
### Run locally outside the cluster
```

Author: Because 2nd number will be for running it within cluster by creating container image.

Author: I will modify it for now.

The following steps will show how to run your operator locally.

Compile your operator with the below command

`mvn clean install`

> It will create `.jar` file for your operator. You can go to the `target` folder and then to `quarkus-app`.
> 
> Now, run the `jar` file using the below command.
> 
> `java -jar quarkus-run.jar`

Reviewer: Instead of telling them to go to the target folder, I would just change the java command to have the full path.
```suggestion
It will create a `.jar` file for your operator in `target/quarkus-app`.  Now, run the `jar` file using the below command.

`java -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar`
```

Author: Modified.

---
title: Quarkus Operator Tutorial
linkTitle: Tutorial
weight: 30
description: An in-depth walkthough of building and running a Quarkus-based operator.
---

> **NOTE:** If your project was created with an `operator-sdk` version prior to `v1.0.0`
> please [migrate][migration-guide], or consult the [legacy docs][legacy-quickstart-doc].

Reviewer: Do these link anywhere? This is not relevant to this java project because there was no way to do this in older versions of the SDK.
```suggestion
```

Author: Removed note entirely as prior to `v1.0.0`, we don't have any changes for `java-plugin` in operator-sdk.

## Prerequisites

> - Go through the [installation guide][install-guide].

Reviewer: broken link where is the url for the install guide?

Author: Modified with Java link.

- User authorized with `cluster-admin` permissions.
- An accessible image registry for various operator images (ex. [hub.docker.com](https://hub.docker.com/signup),
[quay.io](https://quay.io/)) and be logged in in your command line environment.
  - `example.com` is used as the registry Docker Hub namespace in these examples.
  Replace it with another value if using a different registry or namespace.

>   - [Authentication and certificates][image-reg-config] if the registry is private or uses a custom CA.

Reviewer: broken link, where is image-reg-config defined.

Author: Removed completely as we haven't created any image out of it.

>   ## Overview

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Overview
```

Author: Made modification.

We will create a sample project to let you know how it works and this sample will:

- Create a Memcached Deployment if it doesn't exist
- Ensure that the Deployment size is the same as specified by the Memcached CR spec
- Update the Memcached CR status using the status writer with the names of the CR's pods

## Create a new project

Use the CLI to create a new memcached-operator project:

```sh
mkdir -p $HOME/projects/memcached-quarkus-operator

> cd $HOME/projects/memcached-quarkus-operator

Author: Modified accordingly.

# we'll use a domain of example.com
# so all API groups will be <group>.example.com

> operator-sdk init --plugins quarkus --domain lucky.com --project-name java-op

Author: Worked on suggestions.

```

#### A note on dependency management

> `operator-sdk init` generates `pom.xml` file. This file contains all the depedencies required to run the operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`operator-sdk init` generates `pom.xml` file. This file contains all the dependencies required to run the operator.
```

Author: Made modification.

> ### JavaOpOperator

Author: Yes agree.

The main program of the operator `JavaOpOperator.java` initializes and runs the operator. The operator uses java-operator-sdk which is similar to Go lang version of controller-runtime.

> Below code will initize and defines the informers/watches for your operator.

Author: Modified.

```
  @Override
  public int run(String... args) throws Exception {
    operator.start();

    Quarkus.waitForExit();
    return 0;
  }
```

## Create a new API and Controller

> Create a new Custom Resource Definition (CRD) API with group `cache` version `v1alpha1` and Kind Memcached. Below messages are informational mesages.

Author: Modified.

```console
$ operator-sdk create api --plugins quarkus --group cache --version v1 --kind Memcached
InjectResource called
UpdateResource called
Scaffold called
NewCreateAPIScaffolder called
InjectFS called
api.Scaffold()
PostScaffold called
...
```

> This will scaffold the MemcachedController, MemcachedSpec, MemcachedStatus and Memcached.

Author: Modified.

#### Understanding Kubernetes APIs

For an in-depth explanation of Kubernetes APIs and the group-version-kind model, check out these [kubebuilder docs][kb-doc-gkvs].

> The API's used from [java-operator-sdk][https://github.com/java-operator-sdk/java-operator-sdk]. It is similar to `Controller-runtime` from Go lang.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The API's used from [java-operator-sdk](https://github.com/java-operator-sdk/java-operator-sdk). It is similar to `Controller-runtime` from Go lang.
```

Author: Made modification.

> The API's used from [java-operator-sdk][https://github.com/java-operator-sdk/java-operator-sdk]. It is similar to `Controller-runtime` from Go lang.

Author: Modified.

### Define the API

> To begin, we will represent our API by defining the `Memcached` type, which will have a `MemcachedSpec.Size` field to set the quantity of memcached instances (CRs) to be deployed, and a `MemcachedStatus.Nodes` field to store a CR's Pod names.

Author: Modified.

> **Note** The Node field is just to illustrate an example of a Status field. In real cases, it would be recommended to use [Conditions][conditionals].

Reviewer: where is the `conditionals` url defined?

Author: Modified.

```
// MemcachedSpec defines the desired state of Memcached
public class MemcachedSpec {

    // Add Spec information here
	// Size is the size of the memcached deployment
    private Integer size;

    public Integer getSize() {
        return size;
    }

    public void setSize(Integer size) {
        this.size = size;
    }
}
```

```
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

// MemcachedStatus defines the observed state of Memcached
public class MemcachedStatus {

    // Add Status information here
	// Nodes are the names of the memcached pods
    private List<String> nodes;

    public List<String> getNodes() {
        if (nodes == null) {
            nodes = new ArrayList<>();
        }
        return nodes;
    }

    public void setNodes(List<String> nodes) {
        this.nodes = nodes;
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Give the user a summary of what they have to change for the Status the show the example that you have.

Author: Modified.

```
import io.fabric8.kubernetes.api.model.Namespaced;
import io.fabric8.kubernetes.client.CustomResource;
import io.fabric8.kubernetes.model.annotation.Group;
import io.fabric8.kubernetes.model.annotation.Version;

// Memcached is the Schema for the memcacheds API

@Version("v1alpha1")
@Group("cache.example.com")
public class Memcached extends CustomResource<MemcachedSpec, MemcachedStatus>
    implements Namespaced {}

> ```

Reviewer: probably should explain a little what this is as well.

Author: Modified

              object represents. Servers may infer this from the endpoint the client
              submits requests to. Cannot be updated. In CamelCase. More info: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#types-kinds'
            type: string
          metadata:
            type: object
          spec:
            description: MemcachedSpec defines the desired state of Memcached
            properties:
              size:
                description: Size defines the number of Memcached instances
                format: int32
                type: integer
            type: object
          status:
            description: MemcachedStatus defines the observed state of Memcached
            properties:
              nodes:
                description: Nodes store the name of the pods which are running Memcached
                  instances
                items:
                  type: string
                type: array
            type: object
        type: object
    served: true
    storage: true
    subresources:
      status: {}
status:
  acceptedNames:
    kind: ""
    plural: ""
  conditions: []
  storedVersions: []

> ```

Reviewer: Give the user the actual commands for running this. How do we get this file? What is the file called? I would also not include the entire example, I would use ellipsis (...) for `openAPIV3Schema` section as it isn't that useful to the user reading this document.

Author: Modified accordingly.

### Custom Resource - memcached-sample.yaml

```
apiVersion: cache.example.com/v1alpha1
kind: Memcached
metadata:
  name: memcached-sample
spec:
  # Add fields here
  size: 1

> ```

Reviewer: Again explain to the user what we are doing here. What this is? What to call the file.

Author: Modified and explained about it.

## Implement the Controller

> **Note**: The next two subsections explain how the two methods `createOrUpdateResource` and `deleteResource`. These two methods will be called whenever there is some update/create/delete event occurs in the cluster.

Reviewer: Explain how the two methods DO WHAT?

These methods are already scaffolded as part of `create api` command.

### createOrUpdateResource

> This methid inaitlly checks for the deployment by using below code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method initially checks for the deployment by using below code.
```

Author: Modified.

```
        Deployment deployment =
                client
                        .apps()
                        .deployments()
                        .inNamespace(resource.getMetadata().getNamespace())
                        .withName(resource.getMetadata().getName())
                        .get();
```

> If the deployment is `null` that means we need to create deployment for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the deployment is `null` that means we need to create the deployment for it.
```

Author: Modified.

> Below code will check is deployment is null or not. If it is null then it will create deployment. `createMemcachedDeployment(resource)` creates the Deployment and then it will be applied by using `client.apps().deployments().create(newDeployment);` code. `createMemcachedDeployment(resource)` method explained in the next part.

Reviewer: check is deployment is null? rephrase this

Author: Modified the description.

After Creation of the Deployment, get the current and required replicas by using below code.

```
        int currentReplicas = deployment.getSpec().getReplicas();
        int requiredReplicas = resource.getSpec().getSize();
```

If currentReplicas does not match with requiredReplicas then we need to update the `Deployment`. This process will be done by using below code.

```
        if (currentReplicas != requiredReplicas) {
            deployment.getSpec().setReplicas(requiredReplicas);
            client.apps().deployments().createOrReplace(deployment);
            return UpdateControl.noUpdate();
        }
```

Then, get the list of pods and pod names with the below code.

```
        List<Pod> pods =
                client
                        .pods()
                        .inNamespace(resource.getMetadata().getNamespace())
                        .withLabels(labelsForMemcached(resource))
                        .list()
                        .getItems();

        List<String> podNames =
                pods.stream().map(p -> p.getMetadata().getName()).collect(Collectors.toList());
```

> Now, check whether resources gets created or not. Then, it verifies podnames with the memcached resources. If there is mis match in either of this condition then we need to do reconcilation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, check whether resources get created or not. Then, it verifies podnames with the memcached resources. If there is a mismatch in either of these conditions then we need to do a reconcilation.
```

Author: Modified.

                            .withMetadata(
                                new ObjectMetaBuilder().withLabels(labelsForMemcached(m)).build())
                            .withSpec(
                                new PodSpecBuilder()
                                    .withContainers(
                                        new ContainerBuilder()
                                            .withImage("memcached:1.4.36-alpine")
                                            .withName("memcached")
                                            .withCommand("memcached", "-m=64", "-o", "modern", "-v")
                                            .withPorts(
                                                new ContainerPortBuilder()
                                                    .withContainerPort(11211)
                                                    .withName("memcached")
                                                    .build())
                                            .build())
                                    .build())
                            .build())
                    .build())
            .build();
    }
```

### deleteResource

> The delete Resource is an implemented method. The deltion part was take care by the Java Operator SDK that's why it does not have any code as such.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `deleteResource` method is an implemented method. The deletion part will be taken care of by the Java Operator SDK  library, that's why it is empty.
```

Author: Modified.

## Run the Operator Locally

### 1. Run locally outside the cluster

> The following steps will show how to deploy the operator on the Cluster. However, to run locally for development purposes and outside of a Cluster use the target `make install run`.

Reviewer: There is no `Makefile` how will someone be able to run `make install run`?

Author: Modified.

First, create CR and CRD's within the cluster.

> `kubectl apply -f cr.yaml`

Reviewer: Where does this `cr.yaml` file come from? You should tell the user how to create this file.

Author: Yes told about creation of files where I added its content.

> `kubectl apply -f memcached-sample.yaml`

Reviewer: Please explain how to create this file. See earlier comment about that section.

Author: Modified.

> Then, Open the entire project with `IntelliJ IDEA` and run the application. We are still looking to run this code with the Container Image.

Reviewer: Is there no way to run it outside of IntelliJ? You can't assume they have this. What if they are Eclipse users? or use VSCode? I prefer to assume they do not have this IDE and have to run it by hand.

Author: I am trying to run it via terminal but it was failing. I am working on it.

Author: It is working now and I will push new changes and steps with upcoming commit.
